# Overview

Hex++ is a high-level language that compiles into patterns for Hex Casting, a Minecraft mod. This document will give a basic overview of how writting a program in Hex++ works.

## Documentation

This sections contains a list of all docs and what they contain.

* overview.md: This document, described above.
* statements.md: A list of all statements that are valid code, including if, while, return, etc.
* expressions.md: A list of all operators that are used in expressions, as well as other information involved in evaluating expressions.
* functions.md: Information on declaring functions and a list of all inbuilt functions.
* examples.md: A collection of example programs along with descriptions of what they do.
* grammer.pdf: The basic grammer used in composing a program, describes what is or is not valid syntax.

## Making a program

Hex++ programs start with their main functions. Here's what the definiion of one looks like:
```
void main() {

}
```
Inside the curly braces, differnet statements can be made, all of which are detailed in statements.md. In addition to the main function, one or more global declarations may be made. These are either functions declarations, or global variable declarations.

## Global Declarations

### Function Declarations

Function declarations are one kind of global declaration, they look like this:
```
void foo(var1, var1) {

}

ret bar() {
    return null;
}
```
The details about functions are listed in functions.md, along with a description of all inbuilt functions. These inbuilt functions are going to be how you get your program to actually do stuff (break blocks, make lights, etc.).

### Global Variables

Programs also may have global variables declared in them:
```
let global1 = 0;
let global2 = 3;
let global3 = global1 + global2;
```
Global variables hold a value and may be referenced as a term inside expressions, as explained in expressions.md. Global variable declarations can reference inbuilt functions and other global variables that were declared higher up than them, but NOT functions you defined or global variables declared lower than them!

### Save Variables

Programs can have save variables declared as well, much like global variables:
```
save save1 = vec(3, 5, 6);
save save2 = null;
save save3 = 4;
```
Save variables are very similar to global variables, with a few differences. First, they cannot reference other variables in their expressions, however global variables can reference them, whether or not they were declared above or below the global variables. Second, their expression MUST be evaluatable at compile time. This means that it must be a single, constant value, it cannot vary depending on the context the spell is cast in. For instance, a raycast function could not be used in a save variable, but a pow function could be. Finally, the main difference of save variables is that their value is not reset between castings of the spell. This means that data can be saved between castings of a spell. For instance, you could have a save variable that starts at 0, and increases by 1 each time the spell is cast, thus keeping track of how many times the spell has been cast.

Importantly, save variables only work if there is a properly set up iota storage in the off-hand. The spell generated by the compiler will be one such properly set up iota storage, however, if placed into a focus, spell book, or similar read-writable iota storage. This means if you're casting the spell from a spell book or focus in your off-hand, then save variables will work. You can, however, set up your own iota storage to hold in your off-hand to use instead. This would allow you to have multiple "sets" of your save variables that you could swap between.

To set up iota storage for save variable use, do the following:
1. Make a list with 1 element in it, I would suggest using an introspection pattern. If hexagon was used when running the compiler, then you will additionally need 2 more elements, I would suggest a Vacant Reflection followed by a Huginn's Gambit, placed in the list before the introspection. This is needed because Hexagon places these patterns as the first 2 patterns in any spell it builds, so the compiler accounts for these 2 patterns being there if hexagon is being used.
2. For each save variable in your program, top to bottom, add an iota to the list. These iotas are the default values of the save variables, in the order you place them. Whatever values you put here, will be what the save variables will be set to on the first casting using the iota storage.
3. (Optional) Place a retrospection at the end of the list. This is to close off the introspection above. This isn't stricly needed, but makes the iota storage a valid spell, which may be useful in some cases. You may also want to use a Novice's Gambit to remove the list created by the into/retro pair, but this is up to you.
4. Place the list into a read-writable iota storage, such as a focus or spell book; but NOT something like a thought knot.

As a reminder, making your own iota storage is not needed if you're casting the spell out of read-writable iota storage in your off-hand, as the spell itself is a valid iota for the off-hand storage to allow save variables.

## Basic Example Program

That's it for the basics, here's an example of what a program may look like all put together:
```
let foo = 1;

void foo_bar(num){
    return num / 2;
}

let bar = foo + 1;

ret bar_foo(num) {
    return num * 2;
}

void main() {
    print (foo_bar(bar) * bar_foo(foo));
}
```
This spell prints out the number 2 into chat. This is simply an example to show you what a program looks like, if you want more practical examples, you can see some in examples.md.

## Comments

At almost any point in a program, you may insert comments like so:
```
void main() {
    // Print 1 into the caster's chat
    print(1);
}
```
Comments are not considered as part of the code, the compiler will ignore them completely. This can allow you to explain what your code is doing, make notes, etc. This comment is on code that is quite self-explanatory, but sometimes they may help clarify code that would otherwise be hard to parse.

There are two kinds of comments, single-line comments as shown above, and multi-line comments. Single-line comments start at a //, and end at the next new line. Multi-line comments start at a /*, and end at */. This allows your comment to span multiple lines, like so:
```
void main() {
    /* This is a long comment,
    so I decided to split it
    up into multiple lines.
    I could also comment like
    this if I had lines of
    code I wanted to comment
    out temporarily. */
    print (1);
}
```
Comments are a helpful tool for making your code easy for yourself and others to understand, as well as for debugging.

## Pattern Usage

For the sake of allowing you to make more efficient spells, every feature of this language will tell you how many patterns it costs to use. A single spell cannot evaluate more than 100,000 patterns. Some things may not use patterns, and so will not list how many they use, such as variable or function declaration. However, this is only for that bit of the code itself, for example declaring a variable may not require patterns, but generating the expression it's being set to does. The pattern costs listed are the maximum amount that the code could cost, however there are some compile-time optimizations that may reduce that count.

One last thing to note is that in the case of functions or loops, the patterns within them will count towards the 100,000 for each time they are ran. A loop which has 30 patterns worth of code in it will cost 30 patterns per loop it does, however if a function containing 100 patterns is never ran, it won't hurt your pattern count at all.

### Base Pattern Cost

Only main declared, no global vars: 1
Only one function declared or global var total: 3
More than one total functions declared and global vars: 4

## Types

Currently, Hex++ does not have types or type checking. Most functions will only return specific types of iotas, but some can return any type of iota. A variables or list element may hold any kind of iota, be it from base Hex Casting or any addons. As long as it can be stored as a single element on the stack, it can be stored in a list or in a variable.